Only three
morning.
There's a Slight on my desk that's wrong. Slight
Puddle on my desk. But
you haven't got
A Yeah.
Tissues in there? No. Oh, are they emp empty.
Oh, that's, get rid of that. It's not.
Welcome. Uh, Melissa, thank you very much for, for coming
for us, uh, this morning.
Obviously, we're here with the, for the hat that you aware,
responsible for vote.
And, uh, as you're probably very well aware, we have a, uh,
a structured agenda,
although some leniency on how we run that,
but there's, there's four primary areas of
that structured agenda, uh, starting with the Treaty
of Lifetime negotiations.
But before we jump straight into that, happy
to receive some opening comments from you for a couple
of minutes before we get the agenda itself.
So, know my heart on, uh,
oh, excuse me.
Uh,
Well, um,
which is my, uh, for you, when MA arises above the horizon,
our aspirations rise to the year ahead and indeed.
Very good. Uh, this is a government
that focused on making good progress, uh, on many areas
that were, uh, talking about today.
So, um, look, look, briefly, it's not, what I'd say is, um,
uh, We're working steadily, uh, onwards in terms
of, uh, treaty, uh, settlements.
Um, we've, uh, this since the beginning of this year, we've,
uh, passed legislation for, uh, Taranaki Monga
Ang, and, uh, we also, uh, introduced legislation
and had the first reading for Nati hoa, uh, uh, based in,
um, uh, Tam Nui in Central North Island, uh, which is, um,
uh, an important, uh, process.
We've got lots of, um, uh, debates
and discussions, uh, ongoing in that area.
Um, uh, right across from, uh, of course from, uh,
PUI and, and Hoki.
And we can talk about the progress. Uh, there.
There this has been a big change, uh, for, um,
the administration of how we've done this.
And, and, uh, we've, uh, rearranged the, um, uh, department.
So, uh, uh, to, uh, which means, um, the, the, the,
the office, essentially the Office of Settlements, uh,
the Office of Treaty Settlements.
And, uh, Ana has been, um, uh, focused on,
on two basic goals, which is, uh,
progressing the treaty settlements process, uh,
and also, um, uh, t Moana, the, the, um,
marine and coastal area.
Uh, and so the, the, the other, um, roles
that were formally had by Tara Fiti, particularly
focus on Crown Maori relations, has been, uh, returned to,
uh, to pun, uh, that, uh, that process, um,
was finalized in February and has, um, worked very well.
And so my, uh, colleague, uh, Tam Port
and, uh, to Port can talk about, uh,
the implications of that.
Uh, so, you know, just in, in general speaking, um,
you know, new Zealanders have been, um,
very interested in the whole, uh, settlement process.
Uh, started in the mid nineties, uh, uh,
and, um, you know, 30 years on we're, well, well by,
well brought about two thirds of the way through, uh,
and still with some significant, uh, work to do, uh,
which we're, um, OO obviously, uh, trying best to achieve.
Um, so, uh, look, I think that's, uh, probably enough
to send my way of introduction
and very happy to answer any questions. Thank you,
Minister. And we noting
that I've just
Introduce my team head, there's the new chief executive,
uh, Justine Smith.
Smith, just,
And we're gonna go straight to, uh, Jenny.
And the first area that we're gonna concentrate on is the
truly by saying negotiations.
Hilda. Uh, welcome, uh, minister.
Uh, if resolving treaty settlements as a priority
for your government, why was this budget cut
by nearly 40 million?
Uh, well, I, I'm not sure where the $40 million came
From. D eight, I think it is.
It's, uh, 38.6, uh,
four 5 million compared
to the previous financial year. Yeah.
Well, in, in terms of the, the, the basic sort of, uh,
budget for, uh, treaty settlements, uh, there's been a,
a slight reduction to, from about 38 million to about 36,
I think is the fixed figure.
And, um, uh, that, that I think was, um, as, uh, a member,
well, well known was, uh, something that was put in place
by her government, uh,
and previous governments, um, uh, as we
progressed the treaty settlements, there was a,
there was a goal to taper, uh, taper down over time.
Now, of course, the reality is there's still,
uh, a lot of work to do.
Um, but like every element of, uh, um,
the government across, uh,
and every estimates hearing that we've, uh, uh, moved, uh,
EE every estimates hearing
that we've heard this week is this is a government
that needs to be, uh, disciplined of its spending, uh,
because we continue to have a massive deficit, uh,
and a big increase in debt.
And so this department, uh, did ha have a small, uh, saving,
but the, the basics of it retains the, the,
the big difference between the overall budgets of for, uh,
the entity and the past is that a significant amount
of spend moved to TPK as, um, as part of the separation.
Right. So was it just the jobs that were cut that, uh, was
that reduction of 8.7%
or 38, uh, million, was that largely jobs?
Uh, well, the, the, the, the greatest expenses, uh,
in terms of, uh, employment,
but they shifted most of the, the roles shifted from, uh,
this agency to TPK to carry on the Crown Ma relationships.
Was there a net loss? Uh, yes.
Well, there's been a, a small reduction in overall
overall employment, but, uh,
and that's been a relation of that small, uh, drop off from,
um, broadly 38 million to 36. In terms of settlements,
How many times, uh, have you met with Npu
and what feedback have, uh, they
provided on progressing a settlement?
Uh, I don't have the exact figure.
I've met with 'em on a number of occasions.
Uh, um, uh, the most memorable
and positive occasion was, uh, uh, when we met, uh, to, um,
uh, initial a settlement for, uh, uh,
and, uh, the return of that, uh, very important site to Pui,
um, um, when a lot of New Zealanders will know
where the Stone Store is, and Kitty, kitty
and just, uh, over the, um, river, uh, from that is the,
the site of which is very significant, um,
where Honga was based, uh,
and others in the 1820s and thirties.
So, um, that was a very memorable and positive occasion.
We've had a number of other interactions.
Uh, you know, the, the government is very keen
to make progress on, uh, a broader, uh, pui settlement.
Uh, and, um, the good news is that, uh,
after many failed, um, efforts over the past, uh, on,
on, on all sides of the, of the government, uh, there is a,
I think a mood, uh, for, uh, uh, a, a a mood to,
to make progress actually, uh, across.
So with the primary focus is on, um, getting the mandates,
uh, delivered, and we're hoping to make, uh, uh, have, have,
um, at least a couple of them done
before the end of the year, have they
Quite exciting that they are ready to negotiate.
Uh, some are, some aren't.
I mean, there's always a wide variety of use.
Uh, some people want to, uh, get on with a settlement.
Others will say never, never.
Uh, and, uh, so what we're hoping to get, of course, is, uh,
the majority of people being prepared to settle.
And are you open to dealing
with more than one group simultaneously
Negotiate?
Uh, yes. Look broad, broadly speaking.
Um, uh, I mean, now our preference would be to have, uh,
if we could arrange, uh, one, uh,
commercial settlement across, uh, NPUI, uh,
and then recognize, uh, uh, a number of, um,
uh, sort of cultural, uh, settlements underneath it.
It might be six, might be seven.
Uh, we haven't got a hard view on, on that, but, uh,
and so to have some natural groupings, uh,
in across the region.
Uh, but if we could, um, uh, our goal
and, uh, is if possible, is to get a,
a single commercial settlement.
Nafo has taken quite a strong stance against some
of the actions your government has taken,
whether it's the Treaty settlements bill, uh, walking out
of the Iwis Forum, uh, seven AA removal,
the Maori Health Authority.
Do you believe that some of the actions
that your government has taken against Maori has impeded
negotiations progress with npu?
Uh, no, I wouldn't.
Uh, uh, I think ultimately there's a, um, uh, look,
there's always a, a variety of views.
Um, uh, governments have been, uh, trying
to get a negotiate, uh, a settlement with Npui for, uh,
more than 20 years now.
And so, uh, there are a number of, uh, issues
that have delayed, uh, that, um, uh, um,
Maori, uh, the Maori population, uh,
just like the Na Bui population, don't all think the same.
Uh, there's a variety of views across, um, NA Bui, uh,
and there are many that see, uh, huge opportunities, uh,
to work with the government that's very keen to, um,
has an instinct, uh, that empowers, uh, local communities
to, um, uh, do things.
Um, you know, frankly, in contrast to a sort
of a more centralizing impulse
from, uh, the previous government.
So there's lots of discussions being had around housing, uh,
lots of discussions being had around, uh, um, the delivery
of, um, uh, public services at the local level.
So, um, uh, while there, there are things that, um, uh,
people disagree over.
Uh, there's plenty that we do agree over
and, uh, plenty of scope for conversations to occur.
Last question on this.
Uh, so just to be clear,
you don't believe the actions your government has taken has
detrimentally impacted on the Crown relationship with?
Uh, no, I don't.
I think, uh, we've got real good, uh, strengths to build on,
and I think there is, um, progress to be made, right.
Move to Steve, Steve Abel, uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, minister, you outlined,
or at least now, um,
outlined an ambition of completing all settlements by 2035.
Do you think that's realistic?
Well, uh, um,
ultimately, um, it's not something that can be forced
by any, you know, government to, to state the obvious, uh,
a settlement requires two parties, uh, to settle.
Uh, and so, um,
but look, I I, I, I don't think the, you know,
I don't think the patients of New Zealanders
as a whole is infinite.
Uh, and, uh, people do want to see, uh, this process,
uh, completed.
Uh, but, and,
and we we're, we're, um, we we're, um, being as, uh,
forward leaning as we can, uh, to make progress.
Um, but, uh, you know, I think it would be a,
a massive problem for this country ultimately, if, uh,
we get to, uh, 2040
and we're still having these conversations,
so we do wanna make progress.
That's why we're giving everything we can.
Isn't it potentially counterproductive if there's a sense
that these settlements have been rushed, particularly
where you've got complex multi hapu iwi, uh,
where there may be, as you pointed out, um, parts
of those iwi don't want to settle, um,
and the sense that the government are kind of trying
to push things along, doesn't, isn't that counterproductive?
Well, that's always the tension.
Um, that's why we're very conscious of,
and it may well be that, uh, um, that,
that some groups will never settle,
and that that may be what they want.
Uh, and, uh, we can't force that.
And what, what, in terms of the disarray
that's been created by the, um, changes between,
and, uh, what is the impact on those settlement
processes, the relationships that staff have had, the,
the turnover you've got,
I know we're talking about this later,
but it does relate to settlements in terms
of relationship basis for settlements so far. Yeah.
Well, I, I, I wouldn't, I wouldn't agree
with the characterization of disarray, uh, at all.
Uh, I think we had, um, uh,
we, we ended up having two agencies, uh, um, to,
and, uh, Tara ti both being, um, ha having at their heart,
um, uh, developing relationships.
And there was a, there was a sort of a duplication
and an overlap and a confusion sometimes about, uh, the two,
two different agencies and two different roles.
Uh, and so we think it, it's actually simpler
and clearer, uh, to have, uh, uh,
uni ery primarily responsible
for those ground Maori relationships, uh,
and, um, uh, to tar to the Office
of Treaty settlements focused, uh, on its, uh, core goals,
which is, uh, advancing treaty settlements, uh,
and then also the, um, the marine and coastal area.
And, and so to separate those two things, uh,
but of course, the, the two agencies are huge, uh, um,
level of interaction.
Uh, and I think that's working well.
Yes, whenever you make a change, there is a bit of, um, um,
um, yeah, a period of, uh, uncertainty and,
and, um, and disruption.
And, uh, I'm glad that we've got through that.
And I'm very confident in the, uh, leadership
of Justine here to, uh, uh, keep, uh, this side
of the equation focused on getting good,
good progress. Good.
Uh, Dana, uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you, minister.
I'm just interested, uh, just on the treaty settlement, um,
progress, uh, for Nui on the East Coast.
Um, I'll note we spent a day with Hai at,
and, um, that was a great, uh, a great day.
Uh, but just a little bit further up, uh, au nui,
the settlement was, um, initialed in 2023.
Yeah, well, um, uh, I mean, to,
for, for people tuning in to Wau, Nui is, uh, um, uh,
uh, based on the, um, uh, from on the east
of the, the sort of the western side of the East Cape, uh,
going up, looking back, uh, towards, um, uh, Whakatane
and all particularly, but further up that coastline.
Uh, and you're right, uh, the previous, uh, government, uh,
did initial a settlement, um, uh, less than three weeks
before the election in 2023.
Um, it, it, it, it did include, uh, um, uh, uh,
an unusual, uh, element, which was an agreed
to disagree clause over, uh, sovereignty.
Uh, and, um, which, um,
and I've, I've just got the statement here.
It included this statement from, uh, Tana's position saying
that sovereignty has never been taken, seeded, voluntary,
or relinquished or acquired in any way, uh, in any other way
by a foreign power of government, including the crown.
And, um, uh, we, you know, frankly, we're not comfortable
with that, um, arrangement.
Uh, ultimately, um, you, you,
it would mean a settlement in the handing over of tens
of millions of dollars, um,
to an entity which fundamentally doesn't accept the
authority of the crown to make, um, a full
and final settlement as far as, as one reading of that.
And so, um, we haven't advanced, uh, that,
and we're still still in conversations with Tao Nui,
but we're not prepared to progress that on that basis.
And, and, um, so that's a, that's, um, that's a challenge
that we're face and we're, we, we want
to conclude treaty settlements,
but we're not going to do it.
Um, uh, on, on that basis
where you've got such a fundamental disagreement about the
core sovereignty of the country, our view very much is that,
um, uh, um, sovereignty rests, uh, with, uh,
the democratically elected government of the day, uh,
representing all New Zealanders.
And, um, uh, we don't think a settlement based on
that it's appropriate.
Thank you. Just a, a sub thing.
Yeah, Many, we don't believe
that sovereignty was ever seeded.
So I, I wouldn't have thought that was a premise
for settlements been possible.
Well, uh, this would've been the first time that, that,
that you had a settlement with explicit agree
to disagree clause, uh, in the settlement.
Where, where, you know, like I say the, the, the,
the people ing and say that they've never seated, uh,
it's never been relinquished,
never acquired in any other way.
Now, the, um, uh, uh, that, that,
that, that was their view,
and they're entitled to that view.
But fundamentally, if we're coming to a settlement, uh,
which, you know, I think the broad public support
for treaty settlements rests in,
in large measure on those settlements being full
and final settlements.
Um, now it is an issue, uh,
and it is an issue that two parties and, and government
and parliament today, um, your party, the Greens and,
and, uh, to party Maori effectively don't seem to agree
with the idea of full and final settlements.
Um, but, uh, uh, um, um, you know,
national Party certainly does and, and government parties.
And, and, um, as far as I'm aware,
the Labor Party still agrees with that basic premise.
Uh, and I think that's very important
to the ongoing public support, uh, for treaty settlements.
Um, and, uh, that's a very significant element of that.
And, and so what, what, you're left one reading of, of, uh,
that, that agreement that was in that settlement, which is,
is to say, uh, yes, we'll take the settlement,
but actually we don't agree
with your authority to make the settlement.
And, and I don't think that's a tenable position. Can I
Clarify a little more on that? 'cause
I appreciate you speaking about this.
We may disagree on full and final settlements,
but, um, I, I'm pretty sure
that the Labor Party has also recently stated that, uh,
the acknowledgement that that Maori
did not seek sovereignty.
And, and I'm just wanting to zero in on the idea that
by accepting a settlement
and iwi has seeded sovereignty, I,
I think most iwi would reject that interpretation.
Um, nu an interesting example.
'cause unusually they still have 90%
of their original, um, lamp.
And so for them, it would be surely a,
a very significant concern to suggest that
through a settlement process, they had seeded sovereignty of
that land that they retained.
Um, and I, I,
but my main point is that surely there's a version
of accepting that settlement can be done,
but that is not a relinquishment
of sovereignty on the part of an iwi.
Well, uh, look, I, I, ultimately, there, yes,
as you know, I mean, uh, the,
the government's view has always been, uh,
very clear on this, that the, um, uh, that the,
the sovereignty was established by a process of, of
constitutional and jurisdictional steps, uh, sign, uh,
starting with the signing of the treaty, uh, followed by,
um, the proclamations by Governor Hobson in May, 1840,
and the gazing of the proclamations in May, 1840.
Uh, and then has been asserted and, uh, held ever since.
Uh, and, um, yes, um, people can debate about
what was in the minds of, of people, um,
when they signed a treaty.
But, uh, we are very clear that, um, through a series
of processes after that, um, the sovereignty is held by the,
the democratically elected people of the day is expressed
through the government that we have in New Zealand.
And, um, we we're not moving from that position,
Just supplementing off that.
Um, just supplementing on to the Apartheid, uh,
before, um, around the
previously reported to the committee that some
of the milestones, uh, that it would like to achieve
by 2035 is all treaty settlements completed, one
of those being, um,
which obviously we talked about being our most largest iwi
and most complex iwi.
Uh, the reality is that without a doubt,
they're gonna add in that clause that are stating as well.
So what's the coping mechanisms moving forward in order,
knowing that will probably have
one of those clauses as well?
Well, that, that be, uh, form part of the settlement and,
and, and, uh, um, as part of the discussions, uh,
but what we are saying, we are saying, uh, you know,
very clearly that, um, uh, and,
and, you know, I don't think there is a strong public mood
in this country for the idea of, of,
um, multiple sovereignty.
Uh, there, there can be lots of discussions around what, um,
Tino Rana means in, uh, 2025 and 2030
and what, and, um, how that can be expressed.
Uh, and I think there is, um, room
for discussion around that.
And in terms of the provision of, uh, public services in,
in the far north, uh,
and, um, you know, control over one's, uh, destiny, uh,
but, uh, where it comes to sort of formal, uh,
understandings around, uh, sovereignty, uh, our view is that
that is, um, held by the democratically elected, uh,
government of, of, of this country.
Uh, and, um, we are, we're not going to move from that.
Just another supplementary, um,
and I'd kind of like to know where, where,
where the government is in terms of their discussions
and completing the Hauraki collective.
Well, we we're very keen to, uh, um, uh,
conclude those, uh, settlements.
Um, there's a, a, a, a number of them.
Um, and, uh, ultimately there've been, um,
finalization of it being, has been held up by,
um, cross claims.
Mm-hmm. Uh, and, um, debates on the on boundary
with Nati far and central Auckland, uh, the Ong, uh,
iwi, um, down on the, uh, Ong side.
And, um, also, um, uh, with, uh, Nati who were,
and, and others, uh, around, um,
great barrier island or our tear.
Uh, so, uh, and, uh, we are very focused on, uh, resolving,
uh, those issues.
And we're hopeful, uh, that will make progress.
But ultimately, um, uh, you know,
there's very strong different views.
Uh, I've been, uh, working my way through that processes,
um, as diligently as we can from outside of the equation.
And, um, we are hopeful, uh, that we'll be able
to get some resolution and, um, uh, get those, uh,
squared away, uh, as soon as we can.
Well, I'll just take one last question, this area
before we move to the next site.
Thank you. Um, in discussions with Iwi Minister,
has there been any coverage of the issue of water ownership
and any potential
or any of the treaty negotiations
that you're currently undertaking? Uh,
Uh, well, I I, I'm, I'm not aware of any discussions
of ownership of the actual water.
Uh, no, there's, there's always discussions around, um,
you know, rivers and,
and, um, uh, the, the, the sort of resource management, uh,
discussions around that, but not of water itself.
Thank you. Okay.
We'll move now on to the, uh, second, uh, area on Richard,
that's the customary interests.
Uh, do you have an open question from me? Member?
Go, Steve. Yeah. Um,
what is your response to the Supreme Court?
Well,
Uh, um, Look, look, look, uh,
What's our, I mean, our starting position, uh, on all
of this is, um, uh, you know,
a determination to, um, acknowledge,
Uh, Treaty settlements, uh,
and, uh, commitments made in the treaty and,
and, you know, including discussions
around customary rights, uh, while never losing sight
of the basic expectations of New Zealanders to live in a,
uh, uh, um, in a modern democratic setting, uh, where
all New Zealanders will sort of have quality before the law,
and broadly speaking, a, an equal say in
what happens in their environment.
So, uh, uh, we're very conscious
that all New Zealanders have an interest in
what happens in the coastal area.
Uh, and, uh, the, the Trai Moana regime in
so far is that, um, could lead to the granting
of customary marine title, um,
you know, materially affects that.
Uh, it gives the ability of, um, somebody, uh, a group
that has customary marine title to, um, uh,
make decisions in, in relation to resource management seats,
uh, on a bunch of areas.
So, um, uh, our view is that Parliament, when it passed,
the legislation always had in mind a very high threshold,
uh, for that, um, which had two legs, one,
based on TIG Young, and the second one based on, um, uh, um,
continuous, um, uh, uh, possession since 1840
and occupational possession.
So, um, the Court of Appeal, uh,
materially reduced that threshold.
Uh, we've introduced legislation to overturn that.
Uh, then before that legislation was concluded,
the Supreme Court came in,
and, uh, the government is still considering, uh, its, uh,
options in response to that.
And I, I can't give you a, a, um, uh,
a government decision on, on, on that,
but we're, we, are, we are
actively considering that at the moment.
Uh, do you think it's fair, the activation that your
introduction of the legislation
before the Supreme Court finding was a knee jerk reaction,
and in fact, the many, many, um, wise commentators
and observers suggested that it would've been better
to Tahoe and wait and see what the Supreme Court says,
and in fact, that the Supreme Court found in favor
of the Attorney General's appeal?
Uh, no. I wouldn't say it was knee jerk.
Um, it, it was, uh, it was, you know, it was interesting
that the Supreme Court, um, uh, um, came to a conclusion
so swiftly, um, uh, on, on that element.
But, uh, um, uh, no, we, we, we felt
that we need to be clear about that.
And so we, we have had three courts
with three different interpretations of the legislation.
Uh, and so, um, obviously we're working our way
through our response, which, you know, could range from, uh,
leaving it as it is following the Supreme Court,
or, uh, carrying on with the, uh, the legislation
that's been introduced in some amended form,
recognizing the Supreme Court decisions.
And that's something that the
government's working through at the moment.
What are the odds that you'll leave it as it is?
I won't put any odds on it,
Jenny. Thank you.
Um, what contingencies, if any, uh,
have you allocated for litigation against
Contingencies? Uh,
well, it's built into a budget.
Well, uh, we, we built it into the, into the budget.
I, if you want a precise figure, we could, um,
somebody could dig that out.
But, um, we, uh,
The operating funding covers legal contingencies
because is expected to instruct Crown Law on any challenge.
Right. Yeah. Thank you. So we always have a legal
Yeah, we'll just ask that.
Any responses come to the mic who's got people online.
Thank you. Um, interested to know why you chose
to ignore the Y Tangi Tribunal suggestion
that the government should halt all efforts
to amend KU and also, sorry,
Should halt all what, sorry.
Well, there was a Ang Tribunal, um, uh, recommendation
that the government should halt all efforts to amend Kuana.
Uh, do you agree with the tribunal that the current actions
by the government breached the treaty?
Uh, well, first, I, I, I disagree
with your characterization to say
that we ignored the white Tangi Tribune.
We didn't ignore the white Tangi Tribunal. What
Did you do there? We,
we, we, we, uh, read their re report
and considered it, and we didn't agree with it.
Uh, that, that's a very different, um, thing to ignoring it.
Uh, and, uh, ultimately, um, uh, uh, you know, the,
the point I was making at the start is that, um, what
what we're trying to balance is, um, uh, a, a regime
that provides the opportunity for, um, groups
to make a claim based on customary title, uh, to the
foreshore, uh, area, um, uh, against the, you know, the,
the, the, the very real interest
that all New Zealanders have
and what happens on their coastlines in, in a, in our seat.
So, we are a, we're a, we are a nation in a culture, uh, um,
that, um, obviously loves, uh, the coastline
and is very interacting with it, uh, and live alongside it.
They have, um, and, and so everybody's got an interest.
And so what we're trying, the legislation was trying to sort
of pitch that at a particular, uh, level with a,
with a high threshold
before customer marine title is granted.
Uh, and, um, so it's, you know,
very much within the preserve of government to, um, uh,
have legislation in that space.
Have you got a timeframe when the government's going
to respond to the current situation, uh,
In due course This year? Well,
Uh, look, I'm not gonna put a timeframe on it,
but we are, we're, we're actively turning our mind to it.
And we're, we're conscious of the fact that, um, you know,
we do want to, uh, resolve these issues, uh,
sooner rather than later.
Uh, and, you know, we're broad, broadly speaking,
we are concerned about the whole, um, uh, framework, uh,
that we've, um, that that's developed.
Uh, uh, you know, I am worried that, um, you know,
we could see that the way that it's currently set up,
we could be having, um, court cases for many,
many years ahead on, on, um, these issues.
Uh, and we could still be debating, uh, debating it in 2040.
And, uh, so I'm worried about that.
And so we are, you know, actively turning our mind to the,
to how, how we can come up with a more, uh,
efficient process, uh, so that people can get on things.
Um, we know that, um, in the past, uh,
there's been unprecedented demand for financial assistance
for, uh, applicant groups, application
for customer rights in the marine and coastal area.
What work has, uh, undertaken to review the settings
and the operating model, uh, to manage costs within the app?
Well, uh, well, um, my, my colleagues might like
to comment on, on that a bit more,
but, uh, the, the reality was that we, uh,
it was unsustainable, um, as it, uh, evolved when I,
I came the pre you, the previous government, um,
allocated I think $12 million a year for, um,
uh, contribution to costs.
Uh, when I, I took over the role, um, the projections was
that, that it was gonna blow out to 30 million.
Uh, and, um, uh, our government did not believe that
that was sustainable, you know, given the fact
that we could be, you know, facing 20 years of this.
Uh, and so we've instructed, um, uh, um, uh,
a need to have a, um, to, to stick to the broader budget.
Uh, and that is challenging.
And so we had, um, uh, so I think we've lifted it
to 13 million, broadly speaking, uh,
for the next financial year.
But it is challenging, and
that's why we certainly are turning our mind
to the whole framework, uh, to see if there's, uh,
not a better way to do it. How,
Who have you consulted as a part of that work?
Well, it's not part of ongoing con con conversations,
but we haven't made any, uh, particular decisions around,
uh, that, but before we do,
we'll certainly be consulting right across the board.
Mm-hmm. But I don't know if there's
anything you wanted to add on that? No.
Have you consulted with any claimant groups as,
as part of that process?
Um, uh, in terms of formal changes to the process?
'cause we haven't made any decisions around
that we haven't made, um, and have formal
consultations around that.
So do you intend to consult with Iwi at all in relation
to the framework for that process?
Uh, yes. I think there will be an opportunity to do
so when, uh, well, when we, when we make, uh, any decisions
around how, how we can better arrange the whole framework
for, uh, the resolution of these claims.
Thanks. Um, we have had some consultation around, uh,
financial assistance scheme settings, um, from December
to three to February.
And alongside, um, once we've considered the Wang,
recent Wang Tribunal report, um,
on the financial assistance scheme,
we'll provide some advice to the minister.
What work has the au undertaken
to understand the potential impact of section 58
of the Marine and coastal area
WAN Act would have on climate funding, particularly
for those groups that need to return to hearings?
Well, Uh, um, again, might be some look there, there,
there would certainly, um,
and it's a high, well, uh, based on the legislation that we,
we had introduced, there was gonna be a cost, uh, to, um,
potentially rehear elements of, uh, claims
that were underway.
Uh, like I say before,
the government hasn't made any final decisions about, um,
how, how we're gonna respond to the Supreme Court yet,
although we're still considering that.
Um, so, uh, as previous envisaged by the legislation,
there was gonna be an extra cost, and we recognized that.
And, um, but our view was that those costs were,
uh, justified in, in, in, um, uh, you know,
reorientating the whole regime in a,
in a more sustainable manner.
Um, uh, so I dunno if
there's anything you wanted to add on that. No,
No, that's good enough. Yeah.
Okay. That's, that's
Fine. I just one more
to the fact that
the costings blowout impact your, uh, position you took,
or was it just costing you
too much? Is that why you've changed?
Uh, uh, no, uh, uh, um, uh, no.
The, the, the, the, the fundamental sort of driver
for change, as I indicated
before, was that need to balance, um, um, uh, the, the,
the, um, the legislative setup, which, um, allowed or,
or, um, provided for, uh, groups to claim customary title,
uh, with, with, uh, you know, the basic explorations
of all New Zealanders to have say, of
what goes on in the mar in the marine and coastal space.
Uh, and we felt that the, uh, court
of appeal had had come up with a threshold
that was materially different to what, um, parliament
or the government had expected.
Uh, and so that's why we sought about changing that.
Uh, but the, but you know, separately from that, the,
the cost of the process that we're going
through at the moment, uh, is, uh, very high.
And, uh, we are concerned about that.
And, uh, so first step was to put some, um, uh, budgetary,
um, restraint around that.
And that's part of a much, much broader, uh, um, um,
focus on budgetary restraint of go across government wide.
Uh, but, you know, secondly, we do have
to ask some pretty fundamental questions about the process.
Thank you, Steve.
Yeah. Just taking a, a bit more broadly minister,
is it reasonable to suggest that wine
or the marine coastal environment in, in which verse
iwi have interest?
And often those interests overlap?
Um, but of course, we're talking about a, essentially a,
a flu, literally a fluid landscape where
multiple interests can move across that space.
Yep. And that, in fact, recognizing the sovereignty
that an iwi retained, the AKA Tamana
does not threaten the excess and use by other parties.
And so the, the sense I think the feed that back
that we get from Iwi is the sense of this, uh, uh, removal
of a recognition of sovereignty or,
or for iwi to have to go to great lengths
and great expense to fight for recognition of sovereignty,
which seems self-evident
because of course, iwi Maori have had use of that Kuan WMA
for centuries and centuries and centuries.
Why is it that the crown needs to clamp down and,
and essentially have the effect of confiscating
or extinguishing that sovereignty
because it's not a barrier to use
of the marine coastal environment by other interests?
Well, uh, uh, well, uh, I, I mean, I think, um, uh, uh,
a lot of people just trying to go about their business would
ha have a different view around who is sovereign.
Uh, and, uh, um, I mean, that's a broader discussion,
which we've already sort of talked about.
Uh, but ultimately, um, the, the,
the legislation is drawn out, um, uh, would have, uh, um,
uh, uh, the holders of customary marine title do have very
significant, uh, powers in relation to, uh,
resource consents and so forth.
So people wanting to build a, uh, a, um, a, uh, a jetty, uh,
people involved in aquaculture, uh, people going about a,
a whole range of processes, um, w would have
to have the permission of, of, um, uh, a local group,
which is a very significant change, um, to
where we are at the moment and not, uh, not, uh, not,
uh, a material issue.
Um, and so, um, our, our view has always been along that,
that in order to, to do that,
which is a significant deviation from the basic principle
that everybody has an interest in, in, um,
what goes on in our for share
and seed bid, um, uh,
that is why there was a high threshold in the legislation.
Thank you, minister. Look, my supplementary, um, just
with respect to, uh, as we're going on a broader level
and, um, a bit high level, um, back to the,
your introductory remarks with respect to, um, the sh the,
the shift, the restructuring, um, of now,
um, to just focus on treaty settlements
and Tata Ana, are you confident that going forward
with this focus on, um, Tata ana things will, um, also,
um, having that focus on that as opposed
to other things will improve, um, all the, all the kind
of mahi around this area? Well,
That's very much the goal.
Uh, yes, absolutely.
Um, uh, ah, look,
uh, um, uh, the, the, the, the agency now has, you know,
a very clear sense of direction, uh, that we, we, we want
to, uh, pull out all the stops that we can in order to, um,
conclude more settlements.
Um, you know, recognizing that, that, uh, you,
you need two people to be part of a settlement, uh,
and, uh, we can't force, um, things
to happen if people aren't ready.
And so that, that's so,
so you can't control the timetable perfectly.
But what we can control is our ability to be ready,
prepared, uh, um, innovative in our thinking, uh,
and, uh, diligent and, and doing the very best that we can.
And, uh, so I think having a clear focus there.
And then on Moana for, uh, the, the marine
and coastal area space, um, that, uh, I, I, I've, you know,
the, the, the regime was set up with, um,
very good intentions and, and very good focus,
but it has, um, become, um, you know, very slow, uh,
and expensive and cumbersome,
and, um, so we've got a lot of work there to, to, to get
that system working better.
Okay. Let's, uh, now, um, move on to the third item,
which is the transfer of functions, uh,
or what was formerly known as, uh,
onto uni.
Any questions there? Yeah. Thank you.
Um, will there be any legislative changes
to the Maori Development Act, given most
of the workload from transferred?
So for example, ti did most of the organization
or events like, um, and so will those staff, um,
and funding be transferred
to accommodate the extra workload associated with
That? Uh, well,
yes. And that happened in, in February,
so broadly about, I think it was about $10 million in, uh,
um, and annual funding shifted from, uh, what was Tiara
to TPK, uh,
and it's, uh, all in that space in terms of organizing, uh,
events and, and the, the Maori crown relationship, uh,
post the signing of settlements.
Uh, and, um, uh, you know, what, what we had
before, frankly, was, uh, A TPK that was kind of supposed
to be doing that as well as, uh, doing that,
and there was a contusion and an element of duplication.
So that's why that's all. Now with TPK,
Um, one, one, um, one of the functions was
for ti was ensuring the public service has the capability
to effectively engage with most, uh, how will
that continue to play out across other government agencies?
Well, that, that, that'll be a focus of TPK.
Um, and, uh, so, uh, um, you know, a big part of
that is ensuring that, um, that, uh, government does
what it says it's gonna do in treaty settlements and,
and, uh, manage that relationship.
And, and, you know, uh, um, there's been a lot of, um, uh,
treat settlements passed with a whole host of things
that should happen, uh, in relation to, um, relationships
between, you know, particular departments like Department
of Conservation and, and the entity.
And, and so part of their role now is
to ensure that they happen.
And, um, that's, that's their role.
In the past, ZI had a role in consenting fast
track legislation. Does that still occur?
Yes, think it does. Yes, we
Does. And so it hasn't
changed no change, no.
Um, how will that institutional knowledge, um,
be passed to, uh, and how will that operate?
I know that you've already noted that we,
you've lost staff in the, in the transfer,
but one of the assets of, um, the Office
of Duty once in the past is that institutional knowledge.
What reassurance can you give members
of the committee that, that will treat?
Uh, well, I've got every confidence that, that, that, um,
that, that it will in the sense of people have moved over
to, some have moved to TPK, uh, obviously great expertise,
uh, is retained in, uh, the Office of Treaty settlement.
Uh, but the chief sector might have some of the salary.
So in total, uh, there were 44 FTEs transferred to TPK,
uh, but 24 people, um, in, in practice.
So a lot of the institutional knowledge
has gone with those people.
Um, and there've been people who've worked with us
for, for quite some time.
We also, uh, developed quite comprehensive blueprints in
relation to each of the functions.
So that has been transferred to TPK.
We have an information sharing agreement in place, uh,
and we have kind of ongoing conversations with TPK
to make sure that it's as seamless as possible.
Quite often in, uh, treaty settlements
to per ty would give separate advice,
and sometimes that was a little bit different to
what the Office of Treaty Settlements they would be
identifying where things could have been improved,
almost acting as a, a peer review
or a check on the Crown process.
How does that work now considering
it's all happening in the same place?
Well, uh, look, the, uh, uh, well, I, I,
I think it's better to have strong, clear accountability,
um, uh, for agencies as to who's responsible for what thing.
Uh, other, um, so we, you know, um,
au uh, officer Treaty settlements is, is, you know,
solely focus on doing those
settlements, uh, getting them done.
Uh, and as we've discussed, there's a lot of work to do.
And also the, uh, marine
and coastal area space, uh, TPK, uh, has a range
of responsibilities, but it's clear
that they are responsible
for the post settlement relationship, uh,
and, uh, a host of other things.
Now, in, in terms of, uh, you know,
when we draw up a settlement, uh,
there's obviously a wide ranging conversation across
agencies as, as to what's the best way to, you know,
piece together the different elements of that.
Uh, and there are, you know, naturally debates and,
and differences of views, uh, around that.
But ultimately, there's one clear line of accountability,
uh, me as minister
and the agency that, um, puts it together.
So, just saying that they, you are almost losing
that extra check though, aren't you?
Because it was a second check on
what actions officer treaty settlements were taken,
and they were often held
to account when some things weren't done as well
as they could have been through that Ty advice provided.
No, but the, well, well, but the, well, I'm quite sure
what you, you're saying in terms of, uh, TPK is still,
is now clearly responsible
for the post settlement relationship.
Uh, and, uh, that I think is, it's better
to have a clear responsibility, uh, line there.
And I, I think that works well. They still,
TPK still retains its role in the mandating
process. Okay. And other bits, but,
Oh, okay. Thank you.
Um, how will
t's performance reporting framework, uh, be finalized,
um, and in terms of annual reporting
and we updating this transfer function?
So what are the, what are the main changes? Well,
I mean, it's all on the sort of the, yes. Yeah. Okay.
So we have two sets of performance measures.
Uh, one sits in the strategic framework
that I think has been provided to the committee.
Mm-hmm. And that's for quite, um,
quite clear performance indicators
that we then report on in the annual report.
In addition to that, we have 24 performance measures
that are part of our vote that we are accountable for.
So that's also reported on in the annual report.
So they're, they're finalized at this point.
Has any particular impact on, uh, current
and also completed treaty settlements identified any risks
or issues with this, this transfer?
Not that I'm aware of, But you,
you must have done a bit of a risk analysis.
You're taking existing relationships
and ongoing negotiations,
and it's been merged into another department.
Have there been any risks identified in terms
of treaty relationship
or ongoing negotiation stability, uh,
As a result of the Change the government has made?
No, I wouldn't have thought so, because I mean, the core
of the, um, uh, the negotiating, uh, teams,
uh, were with RA 50
and now though we've, uh, um, so taka to, so,
so the, the, the core teams are still in place, uh, um,
and, uh, I'd say the main difference is that now that they,
that there is no other sort of role that they're supposed
to be undertaking, that they're clearly focused on the need
to, uh, um, negotiate those settlements.
And part of that, of course, is building relationships
in the process of doing that.
Thanks, Steve.
What is the number of people who have discontinued work
in either agency who've opted not to accept the transfer,
who have, you know, a high staff turnover?
What is the, what are the rates of loss of people?
So we have, uh, so we currently have got 137 staff,
um, at, there was a transfer, as I've said,
of 44 FTE, uh, in practice, 24 people.
But in terms of people that declined
to stay in either agency, do you have, uh,
around nine people, uh, undertook redundancy,
volunteer to take redundancy,
Which is a pretty high rate, isn't it?
Well, um, I wouldn't
Necessarily actually, um, I, I, I thought, um, uh,
the vast majority, uh, stayed.
And, um, it, look, I I, I, I think everybody recognizes
that when you're going through a, a, a restructuring, it is,
um, um, you know, nobody enjoys that.
And it's a time of transition
and, uh, it's un uncomfortable.
I'm pleased to say that we've come through that.
Uh, and certainly my role as a minister
and certainly, uh, through the, the chief executive is to,
um, uh, motivate
and encourage, uh, the team, um, who, you know, in, in, in,
in my experience, certainly, um, uh, uh, you know, most
of the people who work in this setting are, are very, uh,
highly motivated, uh, themselves to, um, achieve something
for this country, uh, in terms of, you know,
progressing this, uh, treaty settlement process
that has been like, uh, like we said at the start,
a bipartisan project for a very long period of time.
It's a challenging project. Uh,
but, you know, uh, people
who work there are pretty dedicated to that.
And, um, uh, we certainly in, in my every interaction I have
as to be, um, uh, uh, highly encouraging of the efforts,
uh, in, in that.
And, um, so, you know, I think we, I think we, um,
the, the new chief executive has come in
and is very focused on, on having a know,
a highly performing and cohesive team.
So in the context of a, you know,
I would say governmental policy position with a suite
of legislation that serves to undo a lot
of progress we've made in the Maori current relations space,
you're saying there's still high morale in the agencies?
Well, I, again, I wouldn't, uh, uh, I mean, the,
the term you use around undermining is, is a,
is a, is a negative one.
And, uh, I, I wouldn't agree to that.
If I think of, you know, wearing my justice hat
of the things you do, there'll be a lot
of people who'd stand up and say, um, uh, you know, tougher,
uh, tougher sentencing legislation as anti Maori.
I agree, disagree with that entirely, uh,
because our focus is on reducing the number of victims
of crime and, and Maori are more
likely to be victims of crime.
And so, yep. There's differences of opinion
and different views on all of those matters.
Um, and they're all highly debated, uh, and that's natural.
Uh, but w we, we, we are not a, we are a government
that's focused on improving outcomes for all New Zealanders,
including Maori, uh,
and, uh, we, we've never, um, never, um, uh, uh,
suggest anything otherwise.
So, um, uh, uh, are you telling me that there will,
there will be people working in,
in agencies across Wellington who won't necessarily agree
with everything the government does, of course.
Um, but, uh, our job is to focus them, uh, their minds on,
on the project that we have in front of us, which is
to advance treaty settlements,
and we're absolutely determined to do that.
But in that space, you're, you
and the government have sort of uniquely attracted, uh,
a number of excoriating treat yang tribunal,
uh, findings.
Uh, you've, you would surely acknowledge that as treaty of,
uh, treaty minister?
Uh, uh, well, yes, there's, uh, there's been a,
been a few reports and, um, uh,
and, uh, you know, it has been an, um, uh, uh, I suppose an,
um, we, we, we have seen more examples of,
of the tribunal commenting on, on government policy even
before it has been concluded, um, uh,
and, um, holding panels and,
and, um, uh, making observations on things
where the government hasn't actually, uh,
finalized its policy yet.
Um, so yes, there's been a lot of that.
Um, but, you know, we're not gonna be deterred from
what we set out to in our coalition agreements
and what we promised the, the country that we're gonna do,
Even if it hurts Maori crime relations.
Well, uh, look, um,
um, you, you, you seem to be sort of implying
that when you talk about Maori crown relations,
that there is a, a single Maori view, uh,
and there isn't, uh, of course, there's, um, you know,
we're talking about a million people,
and there's a wide variety of views.
Uh, our cabinet in our, uh, includes, um, uh, a number
of Maori with a wide variety of views on every topic.
And so, um, uh, the relationship is broad and deep.
Uh, and yes, there's, um, there, there are points
of contention, uh,
between different elements and different groups.
Uh, and that's just part of the normal, um, uh, process
of democracy, which is, um, uh, robust one
and people are ultimately accountable.
Um, given those statements, um,
and the wider framework of the government,
do you have any planning for
or programs in place for retaining staff?
Uh,
Okay. Yes.
So, uh, at the moment, uh, retention
for our office is affected by a couple of things.
One is the size of the office.
So, um, we lose a couple of people
and it shows up as a kind of disproportionate percentage.
Uh, it's also a place where, um,
our people work directly with Maori.
That's a, um, a capability
and experience set of skills
that is in high demand across the public service.
Um, so we often lose our people
to other parts of the public service.
Uh, and I think, uh, in terms of tracking, uh,
reasons why people leave, we have exit interviews
with all of our staff who leave.
What we find is it's often a development opportunity,
travel or personal reasons.
Having said all that, um, we are very keen
to retain our staff and to do more around that.
So we are kind of post transfer functions to TPK
reinvigorating, um,
and refining a new people strategy that has one of those,
um, one of our its goals is around retention of our people.
Given, um, a number of decisions in positions, uh,
your government has taken, do you find it hard
to attract Maori to come and work at?
I'm not, I'm not sure I could comment on that,
actually. Anything to No
Comment.
I'm here. Oh, look, you,
um, there's no doubt that, um, the current environment
and, um, the mahi itself is challenging, um,
and being Maori in that, in that mahi.
So I, I had asked myself that before I came, uh, to,
and, um, you know,
there are challenges in the way
of thinking there are challenges in the mahi that you have
to do with your people.
So there's no doubt that that's a factor.
Yeah. And I don't look, I mean, I,
broader point I'd make is that, um,
it, it is a, it is a challenging space.
Um, and, you know, when we talk about those issues
around sovereignty, um, you know,
that they're not easy conversations to have.
Uh, and,
but you know, it's better than the alternative,
which is not having those conversations.
Uh, and I think as a country, um, it, it,
it is very important that we continue to,
uh, to debate these things.
Um, but, uh, I, I think New Zealanders, uh, expect from a,
any government of the day that we're clear on our position
and, and our views, uh,
but we, we continue to have, um, discussions and debates
and, um, uh,
and the fact that we keep talking is a good thing.
Um, I don't, um, disagree with your position, minister,
but I do put it to you that the position that you
and your government has taken on a number of 30 issues
would make it less attractive for Maori to want to work.
And
Again, you're sort of, you're, you're implying
that Maori all think the same, uh,
and there's a wide variety of views, of course.
And so, uh, yes.
Um, just supplementary, um, to the, the around, um,
Maori crown relations.
Um, so minister you, you touched on this earlier, the, um,
our young chair for, um,
he recently reached out
to a few ministers about the
challenges they're having over there.
And, um, and would you see that as, as him, um,
trusting in you and, and,
and seeking the guidance of some of our ministers and,
and, um, seeing that he's comfortable enough to go
to our ministers and talk about some
of the challenges in Northland over there?
Well, well, yes.
I mean, I think, uh, uh, um,
right across the country, there are, there are, you know,
just countless incidents, uh, uh, um, examples of, uh,
government in the broadest sense, uh, working with, uh,
people who are close to local communities
and have a better understanding of what's going on.
And, and our sort of general philosophical, uh, view, uh,
in, in, in the National Party
and the, in, in the government that we have is that, um,
you know, faced between a choice of, of, uh, uh, of a, um,
uh, a Wellington based, uh, um, uh,
uh, group of people trying to sort
of sort out a problem in Geico, uh,
and, uh, a local group in Geico, uh,
understanding what's going on
that you're probably more likely
to get a better outcome from, uh, from a local group.
And that's why we continue to have, um, many arrangements,
um, right across the board, including with, uh, many groups
of npu, different hapu with Npui.
Uh, and so, um, that, that, that is, you know,
I think important, uh, and it continues to grow,
and there are real opportunities, um, not just in,
in the justice space, but the housing space
and the social services space.
Uh, and um, that I think is something that we can build on,
uh, and, uh, as part of the, um, uh,
settlement process as well.
But it, you know, you know, it, it goes,
it runs in parallel, I suppose, in the process.
But yeah, ultimately, um, you know, we continue, you know,
we, we we're a government that's very focused on outcomes.
Um, and, uh, so, and,
and you know, when we're faced with these challenges,
you know, we, we want and, um, um, uh, agreements made,
you know, we're interested in getting good outcomes.
Okay. I'll ask that we move now into a final year, uh,
which is about, uh, the government priorities
and the proposed, uh, departmental spend and such.
I think we've covered most of that, haven't we? We have,
We've actually talked a little bit about that,
but any other supplement
questions of what's already been asked?
And that's,
Yeah, Yeah, go for it.
Um, um,
was established back in 2018, um, by Calvin Davis,
and his intent at that time was
that the ti was support the crown in being a
better treat to your partner.
Is honoring the treaty important to you?
Uh, a, a, absolutely.
A and I think, I mean, I, I don't like to be critical,
of course, of the previous government,
but, um, I, I, I think that
quite often comes up in government that, um, uh,
that the government of the day not, might not be happy
with the, um, effectiveness of a, of a government agency
that is supposed to be doing a particular role.
A a and, um, there's two ways to deal with it.
Uh, one way is to say, um, let's get
that agency doing the job properly.
Uh, the other way is to create another agency to do the job
that, uh, uh, a a, a current agency be supposed
to be doing and isn't doing well.
And, and I think that's ultimately what, um, Mr. Davis did
by, by, uh, not, you know, recognizing
that TPK wasn't doing the job as well as they wanted it
and that particular area, and then creating
a new agency to do it.
Um, and our, our view is that as a result of that,
you ended up with a duplication of efforts, uh,
and confusion, uh, on those two roles.
And so our view is that, that that didn't really work.
Uh, and, um, you'd go to, um, major events up north
and you'd have two government agencies kind
of responsible for it.
And, and so we wanted to simplify that.
What work has been done, uh, so for Ang day planning
for next year, and has there been any discussion about
whether the lower marai will be helped, uh, used for serum
Well, that, that ultimately rest would.
Okay. Now, um,
and so I'm not, I'm, you know, I'm sure there'll be part
of the ongoing discussions.
We wanna make sure that, uh, all New Zealanders feel, uh,
they can celebrate our National Day.
Uh, but, uh, as to exactly what's gonna happen as, um,
ultimately not decided yet,
Are there any key fiscal risks to the vote
that might be more challenging
and 2025 compared to previous year 25, 26 compared
to previous years?
And if so, how are they po to be managed?
Well, I think the, um, the, the, the, the,
the primary sort of pressure point I think I,
and I'm happy to sort of have the chief executive ad is,
is the, um, uh, the, the, the, the, um, uh,
payments for claimants in relation to,
um, which we've talked about.
Um, yeah, there's, the demand is high
and our ability to fund everything is, is, is constrained.
And so that, that's a continued area of focus.
Uh, and then, um, uh, in terms of broader risks, in terms
of the treaty settlements, if, if, if we, um, uh,
we are phenomenally successful in a, in a very rapid rate,
then we'd have to make some adjustments.
Um, but that's, uh, something we can manage
if, if and when required,
How much has been budgeted
for the Relativity clauses in both the La Tahu
and Nui settlements?
Well, I mean, I get, look, we've got, uh, I think
what is the $350 million in for overall, um, settlements,
but ultimately, uh, the government of the day, uh,
as every government in the past is if, if,
if we conclude a very large settlement,
then we find the resources,
and then that obviously has implications
for the, uh, settlement.
So, you know, the, the government at,
at each particular point when it makes a decision
around a major settlement, will have to sort of, uh,
will have to find the funding for it.
Yeah. Building on from the
oags recent April, 2025 report, is there any new money
for new policy initiatives in 2026
to innovate, uh, the historical treaty settlement processes
for remaining ess to be seen?
No.
Well, not, not, not new money.
Uh, but it, you know, I, I regard that as core function of,
of the agency, uh, which is to, um, uh,
constantly be asking itself, um, how best, uh,
one can bring about, um, uh, you know, progress on the,
Cool.
You got, you right. You finished there. Okay,
Jim. Um, yeah, I just have one
more in terms of, um, uh,
um, um, your sort of goals
or milestones by, uh, in the next 10 years, by 2035,
is to have all treaty settlements completed
and all treaty settlements successfully implemented,
all promises met, and all Taku time one
determinations are made.
And the current progress, uh, sorry,
the current process is, is no longer required.
Is that realistic?
I think I would describe it as challenging.
I, I, I think we, we, we, um, we'll give it, um, uh,
everything we've got in terms of the treaty settlements.
Uh, there's obviously, you know, the, some,
some still significant, uh, settlements to be done,
particularly around npui.
Uh, we hope to have the hoki ones dealt with, uh, in, um,
in, uh, in a timely fashion.
There's about 13 or 14 groups yet to get
to the mandate phase, which is the sort
of starting of negotiation.
So it's, uh, I think it's a worthy goal there, uh,
on our current trajectory, if you're looking at, at the, uh,
marine and coastal space, the Moana, uh,
uh, we're not gonna get there.
And so that's why we've gotta have some sort of, I, I,
I think we do need to have a real,
think hard think about how we do that.
In terms of, um, some of the complexities
around resolving all treaty settlements, what do you see as,
as the biggest challenge to reach that goal
of all treaty settlements completed by 2035?
Uh, look, I think the, the challenges, um,
uh, you know, and broadly speaking, uh,
we've been doing this for 30 years,
and the ones that haven't settled yet are, are, you know,
by definition the more difficult discussions.
Uh, and, uh, you know, when I, if you go up to Npui, um, uh,
you'll, you'll hear voices saying,
come on, it's time to get on with this.
Let's, let's start, uh, serious discussions.
And then you'll hear, hear other voices saying, um,
you know, never, never.
Um, and so the, the legitimate positions, uh,
and ultimately, um, no, no, no, government can, um,
you know, force the issue.
Ultimately, people have to be prepared to, um, uh, settle.
And, you know, when we look at, uh, the progress
that has been made, um, by, um, uh, iwi
who have settled over the years
and, you know, most obviously, um, nui and,
and, uh, NY Tahu, uh,
but if you think of the progress being made and by Nati UA
and, uh, a whole bunch of, uh, uh, groups, uh,
I think there is a very good story to tell
and a real good opportunity.
Um, if you think of Northland, for example, you know,
I constantly say the two things
that would make a real difference in, in,
in Northland would be a, a decent road.
Uh, and secondly, uh,
making progress on the na buoy settlement.
And so I think there's real opportunities.
Do you think, uh,
that the Crown's Treaty settlement framework needs to change
in order to make it more realistic
to achieve all settlements
to be reached in the next 10 years?
I, I, I, I, I, I think like every, uh, area
of government there is, um, uh, we should be asking sort of,
you know, basic questions about how we do things.
And, uh, uh, is it too slow? Is it too cumbersome?
Is can we do, do we have to do it this way?
Have we do it that way? Uh, so,
and, uh, when, when we think of the things that we,
and the mix of things that we offer, I think
that's constantly, um, something
that we have to be given thought to. Yes.
Do you think we need to make settlements, uh,
more substantial given, uh, the inflation
and the current financial pressures
that iwi find themselves in?
Some of the, uh, the quantums
and treaty settlements don't enable iwi to provide
as much as they would like do for their people,
given the current fiscal headwinds the country
finds itself in.
Do you think that that should be taken into consideration
when calculating the quantum for treaty settlements?
Uh, well, inflation should be, yes.
Um, uh, so, um, yes, uh, on the other hand, there is, yeah,
I mean, obviously there is, uh, a, a missed opportunity
or, um, for, for those who, who don't settle
or do take longer to settle.
And so, um, that's something that everybody's conscious of.
So, um, yes, but, you know, the amounts that we spend, uh,
and, uh, the, the, the various elements of settlements, um,
uh, uh, you know, very much, uh, uh, point of, um, you know,
that, that, that that's the sort of, you know, course sort
of some of the course, uh, discussions that we have.
Uh, but we, obviously durability is an
important element of that.
And so, uh,
and also, you know, public support for the broad settings.
'cause ultimately, you know, the, the, the money
that we're spending on this is money that, um, you know,
we we're, we're, we're broadly struggling
to spend money on
hospitals and schools and things like that.
And so, um, you know, there's pressure everywhere, Steve,
For those iwi who have not settled, um,
or those who don't want to settle
and may never settle, what is the problem
with, um, legislative legislation your government has
passed, which only recognizes, settled the iwi?
Uh, well, uh, um, well, that is
part of the OO of the process.
I, I, I mean, I, I think, uh, uh, you know, when I think
of the, the many broader pieces of legislation,
um, uh, that we sort of encounter such as the, you know,
in the RMA context and things like that, uh,
that there is a, that there is a role for local Maori
to contribute regardless of whether they've settled or not.
Um, um, but, um,
I dunno if there's any particular observations
that you had to say on that.
I, I, I, I, I mean, I think there's a clearly advantages in
settling and having a clear sort of entity that which, uh,
government deals with, but it, but it's,
but it, it's not a, um, a a total block obviously for,
you know, ongoing relationships prior to that.
And as we, as a, you know, as we're talking about,
there's a whole heap of things
that many government agencies do with various hapu
with bui up north right here, right now,
and have been for, uh, many years.
Um, and that hasn't been stopped
or blocked by, um, the absence
of a treaty settlement so far.
But do you see that there's a potential perception of, um,
sort of a coercive quality to a removal of recognition of
ity broadly from a given piece of legislation,
whilst at the same time recognition
of a settle iwi might be retained?
While you do acknowledge that it is the right of iwi
to not settle and not set, I mean, settlements are
to make a, make some token amends for the impacts
of colonization, they're not, uh,
they're not impacting on ity of Wang as
a constitutional agreement.
Yep. Uh, well, uh, um, look, I mean,
Is it, uh, it's probably Shane Jones.
Uh, um, uh, look, uh, yes.
Look, I mean, I think all those, um, uh, I would look,
it's all just part of the broader conversations
that we have a, a as a country and,
and, uh, we all have our different views on that.
And, you know, the, the broad way that I characterize it is
that, um, uh, parliament has passed
and agreed to various treaties, settlements.
So we're not in the business of, of,
you know, we are committed to those.
And we'll absolutely, um, do that in, in terms of, you know,
the broader treaty relationship
and role of that in government.
Um, it's a, it's a constant balance between, um, those, uh,
aspirations and expectations and also the aspirations
and ex expectations
of all people living in New Zealand in a, you know,
a modern democratic society.
Um, and so, um, you know, there's, uh, uh, there's always a,
um, a tension between those things,
and each government tries to navigate its way through
that as best they are.
We, as the government will, you know, never lose sight
of the basic expectations
of all people living in this country
to have a broadly equal say in
what goes on in their, um, environment.
And so that's important.
So you rightly made the point that, um, it's appropriate
that a local iwi who are directly impacted by a given, um,
development or project
or a activity should have some say in that.
But what, where is the pathway to that?
And for example, the fast track legislation which doesn't
recognize that iwi if they're not settled
and doesn't recognize Yeah, I think this,
isn't this an example of exactly where,
Just gonna be careful.
We're getting a little bit off. Yeah,
we're getting a little off track, um,
uh, in relation to that.
But look, look, all, all,
all I can say is my focus is treat negotiations minister is
to, uh, is to make those settlements, uh, make new ones.
And we've got, we are about a third of two thirds of the way
through the, you know, the multi-generational
task that we've begun.
We want to make, um, further progress, uh,
and, uh, our hand is willing, uh, to settle, uh,
and to have good discussions.
Um, and that's a, that's my focus. I got, yeah.
Okay. Unless there's any, uh,
burning last questions from anybody. Thank you
Very much. I'd just like
to summarize,
we're just saying thank you very much for coming
before us and engaging with us.
I think we've had a good line of questioning this morning,
but I also want to acknowledge the very important role that
has in, uh, in our relationship with Maori,
with the settlements and everything that has been done
and is to be done.
And it's a, it's a, you know,
this committee's purpose here is about, uh,
bettering, uh, Maori outcomes.
And this plays a very important part of that.
So I acknowledge the work that the minister, the executives,
and the, uh, clay Mahi, uh, do and,
and actually provide net outcome.
So
I'd like to, I'd like to sort of, you know, amplify that.
Uh, we've got a very hard working team, uh,
and uh, doing a great job.
Thank you very much. Kia. Kia. Thank you.